Published: May 23, 2011 r 2011 American Chemical Society 629 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 ARTICLE pubs.acs.orgIECR Alternatives to HDEHP and DTPA for Simplified TALSPEAK Separations Jenifer C. Braley, Travis S. Grimes, and Kenneth L. Nash Chemistry Department, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, United States ABSTRACT: The TALSPEAK process is an established option for lanthanideminor actinide separations using solvent extraction. In this process, selective extraction of lanthanides is achieved by contacting a watersoluble aminopolycarboxylate complexant in a concentrated carboxylic acid bu er with a liquid cation exchanging extractant in an immiscible organic diluent. Although TALSPEAK process development has been successful on several levels, studies of the detailed fundamental chemistry have revealed undesirable complex interactions between aqueous and organic solute species. These complications threaten to impair process modeling an
d could impact engineered operations. In the present work, results are reported describing equilibrium partitioning and phase transfer kinetics trends for trivalent lanthanide ions and americium into bis2ethylhexyl phosphoric acid HDEHP or structural analog 2ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono2ethylhexyl ester HEHEHP organic phases from aqueous lactate solutions containing diethylenetriamineN,N,N0,N00,N00pentaacetic acid DTPA, triethylenetetramineN,N,N0,N00,N000, N000hexaacetic acid TTHA, or N2hydroxyethylethylenediamineN,N0,N0triacetic acid HEDTA. The undesirable partition ing of Na , lactic acid, and water into the organic phase is greatly reduced when HEHEHP replaces HDEHP as the extractant. TTHA appears to o er little advantage over DTPA in conventional TALSPEAK, but both DTPA and TTHA are too strong for use in combination with HEHEHP. The combination of HEDTA with HEHEHP achieves good balance and exhibits a nearly at pH dependence between 2.5 and 4.5, in contrast with conventional TAL
SPEAK. The latter combination demonstrates more predictable performance than is seen in conventional TALSPEAK, while providing acceptable americiumlanthanide separation factors. The HEDTAHEHEHP combination o ers the additional advantage of more rapid phase transfer kinetics for the heavier lanthanides without the need for high concentrations of a lactate bu er. INTRODUCTION To enable transmutation of transplutonium actinides, an e cient separation of trivalent actinides An3 from ssion product lanthanides Ln3 is needed.1 Because of the similar hardacid2 nature and comparable charge density of An3 and Ln3 , this separation is unusually challenging. The most success ful approaches to group separations developed to date have involved exploiting the slightly greater covalency of An3 bond ing interactions, which was rst reported by Diamond et al.3 This di erence in bonding characteristics is believed to arise from the greater radial extension of the 5f orbitals relative to the 4f orbitals in
 the lanthanides.47 It has been noted that the interaction of nitrogen and sulfur donor ligands with An3 is stronger than with Ln3 , thus potentially enabling a successful separation.5 This fundamental di erence has inspired a consider able amount of research addressing the development of soft donor molecules or ions for separations applications.4,712 There are two complementary approaches to the separation of americium Am3 from Ln3 based on the manipulation of this chemistry, using soft donor extractant molecules actinides are selectively extracted into the organic phase or soft donor complexants actinides are retained in the aqueous solution while lanthanides are extracted. In this report, the behavior of Am3 is taken as representative of that of trivalent transplu tonium actinides. Additional adjustments might be necessary to accommodate heavier actinides. However, on the basis of the halflife of its primary longlived isotopes 241Am, t12 433 years, 243Am, t12 7370 years, it can be a
rgued that Am represents the most important driver for considering such separations. In the European advanced fuel cycle research program, this important separation has been approached primar ily through the design of softdonor extractant molecules, of which the bistriazinylpyridine and bipyridine derivatives have seen the most extensive development.8,12 Extraction sys tems based on dialkyldithiophosphinic acids have also been demonstrated.10,11 Unfortunately, it has been noted that the relatively polarizable molecular orbitals encountered in sulfur and pyridinebased separations reagents increase the suscepti bility of these ligands to radiolytic damage.8,12,13 One of the most extensively tested approaches of employing soft donor holdback reagents aqueous complexants is the TALSPEAK Trivalent ActinideLanthanide Separation by Phosphorus reagent Extraction from Aqueous Komplexes sol vent extraction process and related systems. The origins of TALSPEAK are traced to Oak Ridge National Labo
ratory in the 1960s.14 There is some evidence that TALSPEAK may be less severely impacted by radiolysis e ects than the soft donor extractant systems.1518 The essential features of the TAL SPEAK process have been reviewed recently.18 In TALSPEAK, actinide selectivity over lanthanides arises from the polyaminopolycarboxylate holdback reagent which is Special Issue: Alternative Energy Systems: Nuclear Energy Received: February 9, 2011 Accepted: May 23, 2011 Revised: May 17, 2011 Downloaded via LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATL LABORATORY on October 3, 2024 at 16:24:21 UTC. See https:pubs.acs.orgsharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. 630 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE balanced against an extractant that does not discriminate be tween the groups. The most thoroughly studied TALSPEAK separations are based on bis2ethylhexyl phosphoric acid HDEHP, organic extractant, diethylenetri
amineN,N,N0N00, N00pentaacetic acid DTPA, holdback reagent, and lactic acid carboxylic acid bu er, whose structures are shown in Figure 1. This combination of reagents will be referred to in this report as conventional TALSPEAK . Recent reports addressing funda mental aspects of TALSPEAK chemistry have found metal distribution data are not always reliably modeled using the expected mono and biphasic thermodynamic equilibria.19 Com plex interactions between solute species and increased partition ing of water into the extractant phase have been noted as particular obstacles to producing an accurate thermodynamic model.1820 Ongoing studies address aggregation phenomena, metal ion coordination chemistry in the extracted complex and in the aqueous phase, the identi cation of possible ternary com plex species, the determination of systemrelevant thermody namic parameters, and the origins of the slow phase transfer kinetics of the heavier lanthanides. The concentrated lactic acid bu er is a f
actor in each of these issues, in both a positive and negative sense. In the following report, the impact of changing the extractant from HDEHP to the less acidic but structurally analogous phos phonic acid 2ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono2ethylhexyl ester,HEHEHP,Figure1 onthebasicfeaturesoflanthanideand Am3 extraction in a TALSPEAK extraction system is exam ined. In addition, the potential impact of changing in parallel the polyaminopolycarboxylate holdback reagent has been investigated. The results are correlated with predictions based on thermody namic data from the literature. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION Materials. The HDEHP used in this study was 97 pure material from SigmaAldrich. The copper purification method was used to purify the sample to 99 as verified by potentio metric titrations.21 Eichrom Technologies provided HEHEHP Ionquest 801, Albright and Wilson at 90 purity. The third phase formation procedure was used to purify the material to 98 as verified by NMR spectroscopy.22 The nd
odecane was obtained from AlfaAesar 99 pure and used as received. Sodium nitrate Ricca Chemical Company was dissolved in deionized water, filtered through a 1.0 m membrane, recrys tallized from H2O, and redissolved in H2O to prepare a 5.28 mol NaNO3kg stock solution, as determined using Eichrom cation exchange resins H form and potentiometric titrations. Lanthanide oxides, 99.999, purchased from Arris International, were used to prepare lanthanide nitrate stock solutions La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, Y. The metal content, acid content, and nitrate content of lanthanide solutions were determined using an HP Agilent 4500 ICPMS and cationexchange resin coupled with potentiometric titrations. Nitric acid solutions were prepared from Trace Metal grade HNO3 Fisher Scientific using deionized water obtained from a MilliQ2 water purification system. Sodium lactate a mixture of DL isomers was obtained as an aqueous solution from J.T. Baker, and solutions were standardiz
ed using cationexchange Figure 1. Structures of the components used in these studies. A Bis2ethylhexyl phosphoric acid HDEHP. B 2Ethylhexylphosphoric acid mono2ethylhexyl ester HEHEHP. C TriethylenetetramineN,N,N0,N00,N000,N000hexaacetic acid TTHA. D Diethylenetriamine N,N,N0, N00,N00pentaacetic acid DTPA. E Lactic acid HL. F N2Hydroxyethyl ethylenediamineN,N0,N0triacetic acid. 631 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE chromatography Dowex 50, H form with analysis by poten tiometric titration. Stock solutions of polyaminopolycarboxylic acid were pre pared by dissolving the solid acid in deionized water and adding 50 ww NaOH Sigma Aldrich to raise the pH to 3.6. Analytical grade potassium hydrogen phthalate KHP was used to standardize the base solutions for potentiometric titrations. Potentiometric titrations were performed using a semimicro AgAgCl electrode and standardized acid or base. Radioactive 152154Eu 
and 24Na were produced by neutron activation of 99.999 Eu2O3 Arris International and recrystallized NaNO3, respectively, using a Teaching, Research, Isotopes General Atomics TRIGA reactor with a neutron ux of 5 1012 ncm2 3 s at the Nuclear Radiation Center at WSU. The 241Am tracer in 0.1 M HNO3 was obtained from Paci c Northwest National Laboratory. Methods. All aqueous solutions were prepared by weight. Experiments were conducted at a 1:1 aqueousorganic phase ratio with variations including pH, lactate, and time. Lactate solutions were prepared fresh using sodium lactate rather than lactic acid to minimize possible complications from the lactate esters that form spontaneously in acidic lactic acid solutions.23 Radiotracer experiments using 152154Eu and 241Am were ana lyzed on a NaITl solid scintillation counter and a Packard CobraII auto gamma, for gross gamma counting. Radiotracer experiments using 14C lactic acid were analyzed using a Beckman LS6500 liquid scintillation counter for 
detection with 5 mL of EcoScint scintillation fluid. Water distribution to the organic phase was examined by Karl Fisher titration using a Mettler Toledo Model 4200 KF titrator. The instru ment was standardized immediately before analysis using 1000 ppm water standards. The calibrations were consistent within 25 error. The distribution ratios for extraction using radiotracer tech niques were calculated by measuring the amount of radioactivity in both the aqueous and organic phases. The counting e ciency is identical for both phases. The distribution ratio is de ned as the ratio of speci c activity of metal in the organic phase to that of the aqueous phase: DM Mf, org Mf, aq 1 The distribution ratios Mf,orgMf,aq for nonradioactive metal ions were calculated by analyzing the aqueous phase before Mi,aq and after Mf,aq contact with the organic phase. Assuming no losses to sorption or precipitation, the di erence between Mi,aq and Mf,aq de nes the concentration of metal in the organic phase
. The distribution ratio can then be de ned as DM Mi, aq Mf, aq Mf, aq 2 Single isotopes were used in the radiotracer experiments, while the ICPMS experiments were conducted using mixtures of all lanthanides plus yttrium Pm was excluded due to lack of availability. Acknowledging the potential for isobaric interfer ences, ICPMS analysis utilized masses that were not susceptible to such issues. The total concentration of all metal in the lanthanide experiments was maintained at 1 mM to minimize the possible e ects of extractant loading. To further con rm the comparability of radiotracer and ICPMS results, experiments examining Eu distribution as a function of pH were performed using both radiotracer and inactive metal methodologies with good agreement observed within 10. The following conditions are valid for all experimental results reported: i experiments were run in triplicate; ii all elements are present simultaneously in translanthanide experiments; iii concentrations of HDEHP or HE
HEHP were maintained at 0.1 M; iv nitrate NO3 was present at 1 M; v all experi ments were performed at ambient temperature 21 1C; vi contact times for distribution studies were 30 min, except where otherwise noted. For 30 min contacts, samples were vortex mixed. Longer contacts utilized a carousel mixer. Previous studies establish that biphasic equilibria for conventional TALSPEAK are attained within these constraints.19 The e ect of total lactate concentration pH 3.6 on translanthanide uptake kinetics was examined for all combinations of DTPA and TTHA with HDEHP and HEHEHP. A pH pro le for lanthanide partition ing between a DTPAlactate aqueous phase and an HDEHP or HEHEHP organic phase was also completed. transLanthanide partitioning kinetics and pH pro le studies for HEDTAcontain ing systems were completed only with an HEHEHP organic phase. The partitioning of water, lactate, and sodium into HDEHP or HEHEHP organic phases as a function of total lactate concentration was studied from 
both DTPA and HEDTA aqueous media. RESULTS transLanthanide Partitioning. Lanthanide distribution ra tios as a function of atomic number for equilibration of HDEHP with DTPA or TTHA in 1 M buffered lactateNaNO3 solution are shown in Figure 2a. A similar investigation was completed for the HEHEHPHEDTA system Figure 2b. The concentra tion of each lanthanide was maintained at 20 ppm for a total Figure 2. transLanthanide distribution patterns for alternative and conventional con gurations of the TALSPEAK process. The following conditions were common to all systems. a Aqueous phase: 1 M NO3 , pH 3.6, 1 M total lactate, 20 mM DTPA or TTHA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HDEHP in ndodecane. b Aqueous phase: 1 M NO3 , pH 3.6, 1 or 0.1 M total lactate, 20 mM HEDTA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HEHEHP in ndodecane. Error bars indicate 1 uncertainty. Lines associated with data are added to highlight the translanthanide pattern. 632 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Enginee
ring Chemistry Research ARTICLE metal concentration in solution of approximately 1 mM. All lactate concentrations represent the total molar concentration of lactatelactic acid. The Influence of pH. The results of the 241Am152154Eu radiotracer studies and parallel calculations of distribution ratios based on thermodynamic data from the literature are shown in Figure 3 for HDEHP or HEHEHP equilibration with DTPA or TTHA. Metal ion extraction by HEHEHP is seen to increase with increasing pH. In contrast, metal extraction by HDEHP decreases with increasing pH above pH 3.6. As was described in an earlier report,19 thermodynamic data from the existing literature predict a constant to slightly increasing extraction for both systems as the pH increases. As the disagreement between prediction and experiment in the HDEHP system is seen for both TTHA and DTPA results, it is reasonable to conclude that the ultimate explanation for the discrepancy in pH dependence lies in reactions occurring predom
inantly in the HDEHP extractant phase after equilibration with concentrated lactate buffer. To con rm that the agreement between prediction and experimental results in the pH dependence of HEHEHPbased systems is not an artifact of the radiotracer experiments with 152154Eu3 and 241Am3 , a similar examination of the in uence of pH was done for several other lanthanides using ICPMS La3 , Dy3 , Y3 , and Lu3 , Figure 4. A 48 h contact was allowed to ensure thermodynamic equilibrium. It is seen that for lanthanides across the series the pH dependence in this system is nearly at. The in uence of pH on Am3 and Eu3 extraction was also investigated for the combination of HEHEHP with the weaker holdback reagent HEDTA Figure 5. This combination is also seen to produce a nearly at pH dependence and attains the expected higher distribution ratios. The Am3 Eu3 separation factor is nearly constant between pH 2.5 and 4.2. Predicted metal distribution patterns were calculated for europium in this system
 using stability constants from the NIST database and extraction constants derived from the previous literature.24,25 Europium partitioning was overestimated using these equilibrium constants Figure 3. Equilibrium distribution ratios of Eu3 9 and Am3 0 as a function of pH for several versions of the TALSPEAK process after 30 min of mixing. The following conditions were common to all systems. Aqueous phase: 1 M total lactic acid, 1 M NO3 , 20 mM DTPA or TTHA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HDEHP or HEHEHP in ndodecane. Error bars indicate 3 uncertainty. Thermodynamic equilibrium constants used in distribution calculations for DTPA and TTHA were at 0.1 and 0.5 M ionic strength, respectively.2426 Solid lines indicate prediction of thermodynamic data for Eu3 . Dashed lines indicate calculated trends for Am3 in conventional TALSPEAK. Trends for Am3 extraction in the HEHEHP system are not calculated, as Kex for Am3 and HEHEHP have not been reported. Figure 4. Distribution of selected rare earth ions a
s a function of pH for the HEHEHPDTPA TALSPEAK system using a 48 h contact time. The following conditions were common to all systems. Aqueous phase: 1 M lactic acid, 1 M NO3 , 20 mM DTPA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HEHEHP in ndodecane. All error bars indicate 1 uncertainty. MetalDTPA constants included in calculations were reported for 0.1 M ionic strength. Lines indicate the predicted extraction patterns based on thermodynamic data. La3 results have been plotted on a separate axis for clarity. Figure 5. Distribution of Eu3 9 and Am3 0 as a function of the pH for the HEHEHPHEDTA modi cation of the TALSPEAK process after a 30 min contact. The following conditions were common to all systems. Aqueous phase: 1 M total lactic acid, 1 M NO3 , 20 mM HEDTA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HEHEHP in ndodecane. Error bars indicate 3 uncertainty. Thermodynamic equilibrium constants used in distribution calculations for HEDTA were reported at 0.1 ionic strength.24,25 Dashed lines indicate predicted extraction patt
erns based on thermodynamic data for Eu3 . 633 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE dashed line in Figure 5. The deviation between experimental and calculated values is seen to increase as the pH rises. Lactate, Sodium, and Water Partitioning. The partitioning of lactate and water between a concentrated lactate buffer containing DTPA and HDEHPndodecane or HEHEHPn dodecane is shown in Figure 6. It is seen that the partitioning of both lactate and water into HDEHPndodecane increases as lactatetot rises, in agreement with an earlier study of conven tional TALSPEAK in 1,4diisopropyl benzene.20 In contrast, the water content of the HEHEHP system does not increase with increasing lactatetot. Lactic acid partitioning does increase with increasing lactatetot, but at a level nearly identical with the partitioning of HLac into ndodecane.20 The enhanced partition ing of HLac into HDEHP is clearly established in these r
esults, as is the absence of a similar effect in the more basic HEHEHP extractant. The sodium ion distribution into 0.1 M HDEHPndodecane or 0.1 M HEHEHPndodecane organic phases was seen to be independent of lactatetot with average log D values of 2.0 0.2 HEHEHP and 1.8 0.2 HDEHP over the lactatetot range of 0.5 to 2.0 M at pH 3.5. The distribution of Na into the extractant phase increases with increasing pH in the HDEHP system Figure 7. In the HEHEHPndodecane system, pH has no e ect on the partitioning of Na in the pH 2.54.5 range. In fact, Na partitioning is within the accuracy of the measurements identical to that of the pure diluent as represented by kerosene.2830 DISCUSSION Basic Operation and Modeling of the TALSPEAK Process. As noted above, the fundamental chemistry of the TALSPEAK process can be characterized as a tugofwar between the lipophilic extractant HDEHP or HEHEHP that binds the lanthanides and the hydrophilic aminopolycarboxylic acid com plexant DTPA, TTHA, HEDTA that c
omplexes and retains the trivalent actinides in the aqueous phase. The extractant molecules behave as hard base donors and exhibit little selectivity between Ln3 and An3 cations of similar size. However, both HDEHP and HEHEHP are highly sensitive to the size of the cation, demonstrating increasing extraction strength as the atomic number of the ions increases.26 The nearly 20 decrease in cation radius that occurs between La3 and Lu3 results in a 105 increase in Kex for both HDEHP and HEHEHP.31 Actinide extraction constants are nearly identical for likesized ions Nd3 Am3 . The basic phase transfer equilibrium is M3 aq 3 HA 2org M AHA 3org 3H aq 3 with the phase transfer equilibrium constant: Kex M AHA 3org H 3 aq M3 aq HA 23 org 4 where HA2 is the normal hydrogen bonded dimer that typically dominates the speciation of lipophilic carboxylic and organopho sphorus acids in organic solvents.3235 The partitioning of the metal ion is thus dependent on both pH and the concentration of the extr
actant. Balanced against this in the TALSPEAK aqueous phase is the dominating formation of aminopolycarboxylate complexes. The aqueous phase metal complexation equilibria under most con ditions are straightforward, involving the formation of 1:1 ML complexes, which can under some conditions be protonated MHL.24 This process is also pH dependent by virtue of the protonation equilibria of the free ligand Ln. As has been discussed in detail in prior publications on TALSPEAK,18,19 the predominant metal complexation equilibrium for DTPA in the pH 3.53.6 range the baseline for normal TALSPEAK Figure 6. Water and lactate partitioning as a function of total lactate concentration. The following conditions were common to all systems. Aqueous phase: 1 M total lactic acid, 1 M NO3 , 20 mM DTPA, pH nal 3.5. Organic phase: 0.2 M HDEHP or 0.1 M HEHEHP in ndodecane. Samples were contacted for 15 min. Error bars indicate 1 uncertainty. HDEHP: red square, H2O; red circle, HL. HEH EHP: blue sqaure, H2O; 
blue circle, HL. 3 3 3 Calculated concentra tion of lactic acid in the organic phase based on Kd into ndodecane.20 Calculated concentration of water in the organic phase based on Kd into kerosene.27 Figure 7. Sodium partitioning as a function of pH. Aqueous phase: 1 M NO3 , 1.0 M total lactate 20 mM DTPA. Organic phase: 0.1 M HDEHP 9 or HEHEHP red b in ndodecane. Samples were contacted for 15 min. Error bars indicate 1 uncertainty. 634 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE operations is M3 H3L2 ML2 3H 5 with the corresponding equilibrium constant expression K1 ML2 H 3 M3 aq H3L2 6 Di erent complexation equilibria will be important in the aque ous phase for other aminopolycarboxylate complexants, and under some circumstances, it may not be permissible to ignore the competing complexation by the lactate ion. This basic approach can be used to characterize and predict any variant of TALSPEAK. The aqueous eq 5 an
d organic phase eq 3 reactions can now be combined to develop the expression that de nes the competition between DTPA and HDEHP in conventional TALSPEAK at a baseline pH of 3.6: ML2 aq 3 HA 2org M AHA 3org H3L2 aq 7 which can be readily recognized as a reaction that should have no pH dependence while H3L2 is the dominant free ligand species of DTPA. In principal, the lactate bu er should help to control small deviations in pH. Species calculations reported previously establish that H3L2 is the dominant protonated DTPA species between pH 3 and 5. This model predicts that conventional TALSPEAK should be relatively immune to pH variation between pH 3 and 5. It can be seen in Figure 3 that while the HEHEHP variant of TALSPEAK exhibits minimal pH dependence, there is a pro nounced deviation in the HDEHP system above pH 3.5. Ongoing work seeks to establish an explanation for this deviation in conventional TALSPEAK. Previous studies have noted that this equilibrium model does indeed predict t
he observed trans lanthanide extraction pattern for conventional TALSPEAK at pH 3.6 shown in Figure 3a; hence under standard TAL SPEAK conditions, the thermodynamic model has some pre dictive value.18 Previous Investigations of Phosphonic Acids, TTHA, and HEDTA for TALSPEAK. The original Oak Ridge report provided a brief examination of TTHA and HEDTA as holdback reagents for the TALSPEAK process.15 In that report, it was indicated that TTHA and HEDTA were too weak to compete with HDEHP for Am3 . The original report did observe that insertion of HEDTA in place of DTPA as the holdback reagent in conventional TALSPEAK provided ceriumamericium separation factors of about 20. Each of these original TTHA and HEDTA studies was conducted in sodium glycolate media. The poor competi tion of HEDTA and TTHA with HDEHP discouraged further investigation. To predict their separation performance in TALSPEAK applications, the translanthanide patterns of lanthanide and Am3 stability constants for the lo
g 101 metal complexes with DTPA, TTHA, and HEDTA were examined.24 The pattern for DTPA complexes includes a steady increase in stability from La3 through Eu3 with little further variation from Eu3 through Lu3 ; a similar pattern is seen for HEDTA, though the equilibrium constants are lower than those for DTPA and the change from La3 to Eu3 less signi cant. TTHA complexes for the lanthanides increase only slightly from La3 through Lu3 ; thus they do not demonstrate the relative increase in stability between La3 and Eu3 that is seen for the DTPA complexes. If the reported stability constant for Am3 with TTHA log KAm 26.624 is correct, the pattern indicates that TTHA should be an e cient competitor for HDEHP under the right circumstances and could in principle provide an improved lanthanideamer icium separation relative to DTPA. However, the comparative increase in strength of the light lanthanide complexes with TTHA predicts a poorer separation of Am3 from La3 , Ce3 , and Pr3 than is see
n with DTPA, as is observed in Figure 2a. Since the potentially nona or decadentate TTHA could com pletely saturate the coordination sphere of a lanthanide with carboxylate and amine donor groups, examining the kinetic behavior of TTHA could also advance the understanding of kinetics issues that have been observed for the heavier lantha nides in conventional TALSPEAK.18,3638 The separation e ciency of two phosphonic acid extractants, 2ethylhexyl phenylphosphonic acid HEHjP and decyl decylphosphonic acid HDDP, was studied in the initial Oak Ridge TALSPEAK report.14 Separation factors for HEHjP were comparable to those seen for HDEHP, though the phos phonic acid gave considerably higher distribution ratios than HDEHP. Results for HDDP indicated slightly reduced separa tion factors and much lower distribution ratios than those of HEHjP. These two phosphonic acid demonstrations are the only examples from the prior literature in which a phosphonic extractant has been used to perform TALSPEA
Ktype chemistry. The application of HEHEHP for TALSPEAK separations is of interest for several fundamental and practical reasons. First, HEHEHP is structurally related to HDEHP; therefore, di er ences in metal partitioning can be explained primarily by the di erence in the basicity of the extractants rather than alteration of the structure or solubility of organic phase metal complexes. The 2ethylhexyl groups of HEHEHP are attached via one POC ester linkage and one PC bond. The PC bond accounts for the greater basicity of HEHEHP but perhaps more importantly should exhibit improved resistance to radiolytic and hydrolytic attack of HEHEHP relative to HDEHP. It is expected that the phosphonic acid should be more robust in application to actual dissolved nuclear fuel solutions. transLanthanide Partitioning. transLanthanide trends for polyaminopolycarboxylate ligands different from DTPA in TAL SPEAKlike solvent extraction systems have not been reported previously. In Figure 2, the experimen
tal lanthanide distribution patterns that arise when TTHA is paired with HDEHP or HEDTA with HEHEHP have been shown in comparison with the equivalent pattern for conventional TALSPEAK. On the basis of Weaver s reported ineffectiveness of HEDTA as a hold back reagent in competition with HDEHP, all of the HEDTA experiments in this study were conducted with the less acidic extractant HEHEHP, as a better balance of aqueousorganic complex strength was expected. Even though Weaver had observed TTHA to be an inadequate competitor for HDEHP, the thermodynamic literature24 suggests that TTHA should be capable of retaining the actinides in the aqueous phase; thus TTHA was used with HDEHP. It is important to attain a balance between the extractant and holdback reagents in TALSPEAK. If the holdback reagent is too strong relative to the extractant, no metal ions will be extracted, and there will be no group separa tion. Likewise, if the extractant is too strong, all metal ions will be extracted, an
d there will be no productive separation. The results in Figure 2a indicate that group separation is pos sible for the TTHAbased conventional TALSPEAK. However, the 635 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE e ciency of the separation of Am3 from the lightest lanthanides is lower than is seen in the conventional HDEHPDTPA system, as was predicted from the translanthanide pattern of TTHA stability constants. As the light lanthanides represent the majority of lanthanide waste in used nuclear fuel, this result could indicate that TTHA is a less suitable holdback reagent than DTPA in conventional TALSPEAK. Of course, the studies of TTHAbased TALSPEAK conducted herein have not been exhaustive and should not be considered de nitive. It is also conceivable that mixtures of aminopolycarboxylate molecules might provide greater e ciency, though at the cost of increased complexity. The HEDTAHEHEHP system Figure 2b shows 
lantha nide extraction trends comparable in some respects to conven tional TALSPEAK. As is the case in TTHAbased conventional TALSPEAK, HEDTA appears to compete more successfully with HEHEHP for the light lanthanides than is seen in con ventional TALSPEAK, resulting in lower distribution ratios and reduced separation from Am3 relative to conventional TALSPEAK. It is seen in this system that the translanthanide extraction pattern is atter than is seen for conventional TALSPEAK. Depending on the concentration of lactate, La3 Am3 the least separated pair separation factors range from 10 to 40 in the example shown in Figure 2b. For Eu3 and Gd3 ssion product lanthanides with high neutron capture crosssections, the separation factor is higher with HEHEHPHEDTA than is seen in conventional TALSPEAK Figure 2a, ranging between 50 and 100 depending on the concentration of lactate used. In marked contrast to conventional TALSPEAK, heavy lantha nide extraction is rapid in this system even at low to
tal lactate concentrations. In the prior TALSPEAK literature, it has been noted that total lactate concentration must be at least 0.5 M to maintain fast extraction of the heavier lanthanides.3638 The required high lactate concentration is believed to contribute signi cantly to the complexity of conventional TALSPEAK. It can be inferred from the results in Figure 2b that the group separation factors are slightly higher at 0.1 M lactate than at 1.0 M in the HEDTAHEHEHP version of TALSPEAK. Metal Partitioning in TALSPEAK as a Function of pH. As has been noted repeatedly above, previous work has shown that speciation calculations based on thermodynamic data aqueous and biphasic from the literature do not describe the observed pattern of pH dependence in conventional TALSPEAK separa tions.19 The thermodynamic modeling calculations used to project this discrepancy assume the predominance of lanthanide extraction as the LnAHA3 complex throughout the pH range and independent of lactate concent
ration.3235 Weaver and Kappelmann have indicated that an alternate metal ion extraction pathway exists at high lactate and high metal concentrations in the system, in effect, the extraction of lanthanide complexes as mixed lactateHDEHP species e.g., LnLacAHA2.39 Kosyakov and Yerin have postulated similar species in radiotracer studies of curium and samarium extraction in conventional TALSPEAK.35 In both cases, the species proposed is based on the results of slope analysis. Such a species could account for reduced extraction at the high end of the TALSPEAK pH range. An extraction process involving lactate would likely only be important if considerable partitioning of lactate into the organic phase was occurring. The results in Figures 35 show the pH pro les for Eu and Am for several variations of the TALSPEAK process examined in this investigation. Following from the analysis of complexation equilibria in eqs 37 above, it is appropriate to consider the observed pH trends in terms of the
 metal ion distribution ratios. Assuming that the equilibria de ned above are applicable in all systems, the theoretical distribution ratios shown in Figures 35 have been calculated on the basis of the following model expression: D M AHA 3 M3 ML2 ML2 ML3 MR2 MHR 8 where L is lactate, R is DTPA, and AHA is the singly ionized con ventional hydrogen bonded dimer of HDEHP HDEHP2 . A detailed discussion of this equation and the equilibrium con stants necessary for application have been reported previously.18,19 Equilibrium constants applied in the calculations were taken from the NIST database24 and, for the extraction equilibrium, from Stary26 or Kubota et al.25 For the HEDTA calculations, the MHR species was omitted from modeling calculations, as no equilib rium constant describing such a species is reported in the NIST database. Several hypotheses have been o ered in the literature to account for the mismatch observed between the model and experimental results in conventional TALSPEAK. O
ne possible option suggested was the undocumented presence of aqueous phase competition reactions, for example, LnLac4 species or mixed LnDTPALac complexes.19 Jensen and coworkers have reported the results of spectrophotometric studies that appear to con rm the absence of either ternary LnDTPALac or LnLac4 species in TALSPEAK aqueous phases.40 Alternatively, the discrepancy could arise from complications in the organic phase of TALSPEAK. The presence of mixed LnLacnAHA3n extracted species as suggested by Kosyakov and Yerin35 and Weaver and Kappelmann39, dramatic changes in the activity of the organic phase brought on by increased partitioning of lactic acid, or the increase of Na concentration in the organic phase at higher pH forming the complex Na DEHPHDEHP3 2830 have all been suggested. The contrast between HDEHP and HEHEHP observations in Figure 3 relative to theoretical calculations imply that uncharted inter actions of HDEHP with other ions or molecules in the organic phase may b
e largely responsible for the mismatch between predicted performance and observed behavior. When HEHEHP is substituted for HDEHP in conventional TALSPEAK Figure 4, the high pH deviation from model predictions disappears. The distribution ratios of La3 , Eu3 , Dy3 , Lu3 , and Y3 calculated on the basis of the thermo dynamic data for the DTPAHEHEHP system as a function of pH show the best agreement with the experimental observa tions for the lightest lanthanides. The agreement between experimental and calculated values is poorer for the middle to heavier lanthanides. In contrast to model calculations on con ventional TALSPEAK, the model tends to underestimate metal extraction, though it predicts the correct pH pro le of the lanthanides studied. It is noteworthy that the distribution ratios for the lanthanides in this system are at least 102 lower than in conventional TALSPEAK, implying that DTPA is too strong for this coupling. When HEHEHP is instead matched with the pentadentate HEDTA h
oldback reagent, Eu3 distribution ratios greater than 1 are achievable without apparently compromising the integrity of the organic phase Figure 5. An upward trend is indicated in both experimental data and predicted performance. The pH 636 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE dependence of the experimental extraction results is in general agreement with calculations of the model, but the di erence between the experimental and modelprediction values increases with increasing pH. It is premature to speculate on the origins of this di erence, though an obvious suggestion is the possible presence of ternary complexes e.g., LnLacHEDTA. The literature notes several examples of ternary LnXHEDTA2 complexes, where X is a carboxylic acid or an aminopolycarb oxylate, but the HEDTAlactate example is not speci cally observed.41,42 As HEDTA is only pentadentate, the formation of ternary complexes will be more probable in
 the lanthanide HEDTA complexes than would be expected for the octadentate DTPA. Further examination of this possibility is warranted. Organic Phase Composition. The isostructural nature of the HDEHP and HEHEHP extractant molecules tends to impli cate the difference in basicity of the extractants in the significant pH dependence deviation that is seen for HDEHP but not HEHEHP. It can be noted from the prior literature that HEH EHP has a lower tendency toward dimerization and higher pKa log KD 3.37; pKa 4.51 than HDEHP log KD 3.68; pKa 3.47.43 The lanthanide extraction trends are similar for the two extractants but displaced toward higher pH for HEHEHP. Previous work has shown that there is a notable tendency of lactate, sodium, and water to partition into the HDEHP1,4 diisopropylbenzene organic phase when lactate is present.20 One possible explanation for the more predictable behavior of the HEHEHP system relative to HDEHP is that the higher basicity and lowered dimerization tendency m
ight lead to reduced partitioning of lactic acid, sodium ions, and water into the organic phase for HEHEHP. The partitioning of lactate and water as a function of the total lactate concentration is seen in Figure 6 to be higher into HDEHPndodecane than into HEHEHPndodecane. It was noted above that water and lactate partitioning into 0.1 M HEH EHP in ndodecane is within error comparable to or less than the Kd value for water or lactic acid into kerosene.27 This is signi cantly less than the water and lactate partitioning into HDEHP1,4diisopropylbenzene that was reported previously.20 As lactic acid partitioning is 3 times lower in the HEHEHP system and the water content of the HEHEHP is constant and about 100 times lower, it is tempting to postulate that these di erences may account for the relative accuracy of thermody namic modeling in the two systems. Sodium ion partitioning into HDEHP is seen in Figure 7 to increase with rising pH, while the corresponding plot for HEH EHP shows no c
orrelation between sodium extraction and solution pH. Literature reports indicate that log Kex for Na extraction by HDEHP is 3.56 0.08 from 1 M NaClO4 and for HEHEHP is 5.46 0.09 from 0.5 M NaNO3, both as in eq 9.2830 Literature reports indicate that the dominant phase transfer reaction for Na in these systems is Na aq 2 HA 2 org NaA 3 3 HA org H aq 9 Using eq 9 to calculate the organic phase concentration of sodium for extraction from simple salt media under the condi tions of these experiments, 1 M NO3 , 0.1 M HDEHP, 20 mM DTPA, the predicted concentration of the extracted NaAHA3 species ranges from 0.46 to 39.4 mM as the pH is increased from 2.7 to 4.4. The experimentally measured distribution ratio of Na is 84 mM at a pH of 4.4. As this value is twice that predicted, another process must contribute to Na extraction when lactate is present. Since there appears to be no correlation between Na extraction and lactatetot, it is likely that whatever process contributes, it does not direc
tly involve lactate. The marked contrast in pH dependence for metal ion extraction between the HDEHP and HEHEHP systems is noteworthy in this regard. Neutron, Xray scattering, and com plementary distributionspectroscopic experiments have been completed to address possible aggregation phenomena in these systems; those results are being analyzed and will be the subject of future publications. CONCLUSIONS The conventional TALSPEAK process for separation of lanthanides from trivalent actinides balances the strong liquid cation exchanging extractant molecule HDEHP against the watersoluble aminopolycarboxylate complexant DTPA in a con centrated lactic acid bu er. The high lactate concentration is necessary to allow acceptable phase transfer kinetics. To address the inherent complexity of this system demonstrated in earlier and ongoing fundamental studies, the impact of altering the relative strength of the aminopolycarboxylate holdback reagent and of the extractant has been investigated. The
se studies have revealed that substituting the higher denticity TTHA for DTPA in conventional TALSPEAK based on HDEHP results in slightly improved AmLn separa tion factors for heavy lanthanides but lowered group separation e ciency for the more important light lanthanides. Substitution of the phosphonic acid extractant HEHEHP for HDEHP results in lower distribution ratios overall in the conventional TALSPEAK pH bu er range, probably indicating that DTPA is too strong to be matched against HEHEHP. Substitution of HEHEHP for HDEHP nearly eliminates the substantial pH dependence of conventional TALSPEAK extraction in favor of an almost at pH pro le. The pH dependence of the HEH EHPDTPA system is predicted more reliably by thermody namic data than has been seen for the HDEHPDTPA system. The nal adjustment of substituting the weaker holdback reagent HEDTA for DTPA in the HEHEHP system results in further improvements in predictability of the process performance based on available thermodynam
ic data, a at dependence of lantha nide extraction on equilibrium pH, su ciently improved phase transfer kinetics to contemplate a signi cant reduction in the concentration of lactate bu er required, dramatically reduced partitioning of both water and lactic acid into the HEHEHP extractant phase relative to HDEHP, and a nearly at trans lanthanide extraction trend that is approximately consistent with predictions made using thermodynamic data from the existing literature. The combined results of these investigations indicate that a considerable potential for improvement of TALSPEAKtype separations is achievable by better matching of extractant and holdback reagent complex strength while reducing the acidity of the organophosphorus extractant. The application of a holdback reagent with lower denticity appears also to o er improvement in phase transfer kinetics. These results suggest that the greater extraction strength of HDEHP resulting from its higher acidity may actually be detrimenta
l to the performance potential of TALSPEAK separations. Further investigation of the HEH EHPHEDTA system is recommended. 637 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author Email: knashwsu.edu. Present Addresses Paci c Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, United States ACKNOWLEDGMENT Work supported at Washington State University by the U.S. Department of Energy, O ce of Nuclear Energy Science and Technology, Nuclear Energy Research InitiativeConsortium NERIC, contract number DEFC0702ID14896, and the Fuel Cycle Research and Development FCRD Program, Minor Actinide Separations Sigma Team REFERENCES 1 Nash, K. L.; Madic, C.; Mathur, J. N.; Lacquement, J. Actinide Separation Science and Technology. In The Chemistry of Actinides and Transactinide elements; Morss, L. R., Katz, J. J., Edelstein, N., Fuger, J., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 2006; Vol 4, Chap
ter 24, pp 26222798. 2 Aspinall, H. Chemistry of the fBlock Elements, 5th ed; Gordon Breach: Australia, 2001. 3 Diamond, R. M.; Street, K. J.; Seaborg, G. T. An Ion Exchange Indication of Possible 5f Hybridized Bonding in the Actinides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1954, 76, 1461 1469. 4 Jensen, M. P.; Bond, A. H. In uence of aggregation on the extraction of trivalent lanthanide and actinide cations by puri ed Cyanex 272, Cyanex 301, and Cyanex 302. Radiochim. Acta 2002, 90, 205 209. 5 Jensen, M. P.; Bond, A. H. Comparison of covalency in the complexes of trivalent actinide and lanthanide cations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124, 9870 9877. 6 Kozimor, S. A.; Yang, P.; Batista, E. R.; Boland, K. S.; Burns, C. J.; Clark, D. L.; Conradson, S. D.; Martin Wilkerson, M. P.; Wolfsberg, L. E. Trends in covalency for d and fElement metallocene dichlorides identi ed using chlorine Kedge xray absorption spectroscopy and timedependent density functional theory. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 12125 12136. 7 Choppin
, G. R.; Nash, K. L. Actinide separation science. Radio chim. Acta 1995, 7071, 225 236. 8 Ekberg, C.; Fermvik, A.; Retegan, T.; Skarnemark, G.; Foreman, M. R. S.; Hudson, M. J.; Englund, S.; Nilsson, M. An overview and historical look back at the solvent extraction using nitrogen donor ligands to extract and separate AnIII from LnIII. Radiochim. Acta 2008, 96, 225 233. 9 Mathur, J. N.; Murali, M. S.; Nash, K. L. Actinide Partitioning A Review. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 2001, 19, 357 390. 10 Modolo, G.; Kluxen, P.; Geist, A. Demonstration of the LUCA process for the separation of americiumIII from curiumIII, californiumIII, and lanthanidesIII in acidic solution using a syner gistic mixture of bischlorophenyldithiophosphinic acid and tris2 ethylhexylphosphate. Radiochim. Acta 2010, 98, 193 201. 11 Peterman, D. R.; Martin, L. R.; Klaehn, J. R.; Harrup, M. K.; Greenhalgh, M. R.; Luther, T. A. Selective separation of minor actinides and lanthanides using aromatic dithiophosphinic and phosphin
ic acid derivatives. J. Rad. Nucl. Chem. 2009, 282, 527 531. 12 Hill, C.; Guillaneux, D.; Berthon, L.; Madic, C. SanexBTP process development studies. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 2002, No. Suppl. 3, 453 461. 13 Mincher, B. J.; Modolo, G.; Mezyk, S. P. Review article: The e ects of radiation chemistry on solvent extraction: 1. Conditions in acidic solution and a review of TBP radiolysis. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 2009, 27, 1 25. 14 Weaver, B.; Kappelmann, F. A. TALSPEAK, A New Method of Separating Americium and Curium from the Lanthanides by Extraction from an Aqueous Solution of an Aminopolyacetic Acid Complex with a Monoacetic Organophosphate or Phosphonate; ORNL3559, Oak Ridge National Laboratory: Oak Ridge, TN, 1964. 15 Tachimori, S.; Nakamura, H. Radiation e ects on the separa tion of lanthanides and transplutonides by the TALSPEAKtype extrac tion. J. Rad. Nucl. Chem. 1979, 52, 343 354. 16 Martin, L. R.; Mincher, B. J.; Mezyk, S. P.; Elias, G.; Tillotson, R. D. E ects of Aqueous Phase Rad
iolysis on Lactic Acid Under TALSPEAK Conditions. ACS Symposium Series; American Chemical Society: Washington, DC, 2010; Vol 1046, Chapter 20, pp 243253. 17 Martin, L. R.; Mezyk, S. P.; Mincher, B. J. Determination of Arrhenius and Thermodynamic Parameters for the Aqueous Reaction of the Hydroxyl Radical with Lactic Acid. J. Phys. Chem. A 2009, 113, 141 145. 18 Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. Review article: A review of the development and operational characteristics of the TALSPEAK process. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 2007, 25, 665 710. 19 Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. Translanthanide extraction studies in the TALSPEAK system: Investigating the e ect of acidity and tempera ture. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 2009, 27, 354 377. 20 Grimes, T. S.; Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. Lactic Acid Partitioning in TALSPEAK Extraction Systems. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2010, 45, 1725 1732. 21 Partridge, J. A.; Jensen, R. C. Puri cation of Bis2ethylhexyl Hydrogen phosphate by precipitation of copperII bis2ethylhexyl phosphate. J. In
org. Nucl. Chem. 1969, 31, 2547 2589. 22 Hu, Z.; Pan, Y.; Ma, W.; Fu, X. Puri cation of organopho sphorus acid extractants. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 1995, 13, 965 976. 23 Carothers, W. H.; Van Natta, F. J. Studies on polymerization and ring formation. III. Glycol esters of carbonic acid. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1930, 52, 314 326. 24 Martell, A. E.; Smith, R. M. NIST Critically Selected Stability Constants of Metal Complexes Database, version 8.0; National Institute of Standards and Technology: Gaithersburg, MD, 2004. 25 Kubota, F.; Goto, M.; Nakashio, F. Extraction of Rare Earth Metals with 2ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono2ethylhexyl Ester in the Presence of Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic Acid in Aqueous Phase. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. 1993, 11, 437 453. 26 Stary, J. Separation of the transplutonium elements. Talanta 1966, 13 3, 421 437. 27 Groschu , E. The solubility of water in benzole, petroleum, para n. Z. Elecktrochem. 1911, 17, 348 354. 28 McDowell, W. J.; Coleman, C. P. Sodium and stront
ium extraction by di2ethylhexyl phosphate: mechanism and equilibria. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1965, 27, 1117 1139. 29 Gao, Z.; Sun, S.; Kong, W.; Wang, B.; Shen, J. Study on the Solvent Extraction of Sodium with HDEHP; Shandong University: Shandong, P.R. China, 1983; Vol. 4, p 80. 30 Komasawa, I.; Otake, T.; Higaki, Y. Equilibrium studies of the extraction of divalent metals from nitrate media with Di2ethylhexyl Phosphoric Acid. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1981, 43, 3351 3356. 31 Shannon, R. D. Revised e ective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides. Acta Crystallogr. 1976, A32, 751 767. 32 Peppard, D. F.; Mason, G. W.; Maier, J. L.; Driscoll, W. J. Fractional extraction of the lanthanides as their dialkyl orthophos phates. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1957, 4, 334 343. 33 Svantesson, I.; Persson, G.; Hagstr om, I.; Liljenzin, J. O. Distribution ration and empirical equations for the extraction of elements in PUREX high level waste solution II: HDEHP. 
J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1980, 42, 1037 1043. 34 Kosyakov, V. N.; Yerin, E. A. Separation of transplutonium and rareearth elements by extraction with HDEHP from DTPA solutions. J. Radioanal. Chem. 1978, 43, 37 51. 35 Kosyakov, V. N.; Yerin, E. A. On the mechanism of trivalent actinide extraction in the system HDEHP lactic acid with DTPA. J. Radioanal. Chem. 1980, 56, 93 104. 638 dx.doi.org10.1021ie200285r Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2012, 51, 629 638 Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research ARTICLE 36 Kolarik, Z.; Koch, G.; Kuhn, W. Acidic organophosphorus extractants. XVIII. Rate of lanthanide III extraction by bis2 ethylhexyl phosphoric acid from complexing media. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1974, 36, 905 909. 37 Danesi, P. R.; Cianetti, C.; Horwitz, E. P. Distribution equili briums of europiumIII in the system: bis2ethylhexylphosphoric acid, organic diluentsodium chloride, lactic acid, polyaminocarboxylic acid, water. Sep. Sci. Technol. 1982, 17, 507 519. 38 Nilsson, M.; Heydon, A.; Nash, K. L. St
udies of the lactic acid concentration on extraction equilibria and kinetics in TALSPEAK chemistry. Manuscript in preparation. 39 Weaver, B.; Kappelmann, F. A. Preferential extraction of lanthanides over trivalent actinides by monoacidic organophosphates from carboxylic acids and from mixtures of carboxylic and aminopoly acetic acids. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1968, 30, 263 272. 40 Leggett, C. J.; Liu, G.; Jensen, M. P. Do Aqueous Ternary Complexes In uence the TALSPEAK Process? Solvent Extr Ion Exch. 2010, 28, 313 334. 41 Thompson, L. C.; Loraas, J. A. Complexes of the Rare Earths. III. Mixed Complexes with NHydroxyethylethylenediaminetriacetic Acid. Inorg. Chem. 1963, 2, 89 93. 42 Choppin, G. R.; Thakur, P.; Mathur, J. N. Complexation thermo dynamics and structural aspects of actinideaminopolycarboxylates. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2006, 78, 936 947. 43 Miralles, N.; Sastre, A.; Martinez, M.; Aguilar, M. The aggrega tion of organophosphorus acid compounds in toluene. Anal. Sci. 1992, 8, 773 777.